# Lake Powell Temperature Release Scenarios

Data, scripts, and script outputs that identify Lake Powell water surface elevations for release temperature scenarios. Elevation ranges are estimated for each temperature scenario for release through the turbine (elevation 3490 feet) and release through the river outlets (3370 feet).

## Data Sources
1. Fish temperature suitability - Table 2 from Valdez, R. A., Speas, D. W., and Kubly, D. M. (2013). "Benefits and Risks of Temperature Modification at Glen Canyon Dam to Aquatic Resources of the Colorado River in the Grand Canyon." U.S. Bureau of Reclamation, Salt Lake City, UT. https://gcdamp.com/images_gcdamp_com/b/bf/GCD-Temp_Mod-Valdez_%26_Speas_9-17-2013.pdf. FishTemperatureRequirements.xlsx

2. Dibble/Yackulic Spreadsheet model of monthly release temperature as a function fo surface water elevation. TemperatureModel_GrandCanyonStorage.xlsx (unpublished)

3. Time series of Glen Canyon Dam release temperature provided by Bryce M. 15-minute time step. GCD_release_water_temp.csv

4. Time series of daily Glen Canyon Dam elevation - USBR (2020). Water Operations: Historic Data, Upper Colorado River Division, U.S. Buruea of Reclamation. https://www.usbr.gov/rsvrWater/HistoricalApp.html. LAKEPOWELL06-16-2020T16.32.29.csv.

5. Lake Powell Temperature Profiles. Vernieu, W. S. (2015). "Historical Physical and Chemical Data for Water in Lake Powell and from Glen Canyon Dam Releases, Utah-Arizona, 1964 –2013." Data Series 471, Version 3.0. https://pubs.usgs.gov/ds/471/pdf/ds471.pdf. 'qryProfiles at Primary Stations.csv'.


## Script Files
1. **LakePowellElevationTempUncertainty.Rmd** -- Markdown document. First reads all five data sources, second specifies release temperature scenarios, third calculates range of release temperatures at specified water surface elevations (using data sources #3, 4, and 5), and finally generates several figures that show 
 reservoir water surface elevations by month to achieve different water release temperatures. Outputs figures and markdown text to the file **LakePowellElevationTempUncertainty.pdf**
 
2. **LakePowellElevationTempModelIntegration.r** -- R file with same code as **LakePowellElevationTempUncertainty.Rmd**. Just generates figures as images not .pdf.

3. **LakePowellElevationTempScenarios.r** -- R file with initial version of code of **LakePowellElevationTempModelIntegration.r**. Generates some of the same figures as **LakePowellElevationTempModelIntegration.r**.
Additionally generates plots that show the daily range of release temperature (PowellReleaseTempRangeByMonthCDF.png, PowellReleaseTempRangeByMonthYearCDF.png, PowellReleaseTempRangeByYearCDF.png). This script also compares Wahweap temperature profile at turbine elevation to turbine release temperature (CompareReleaseWaweap.png). 


## Output Files

1. **LakePowellElevationTempUncertainty.pdf** -- Pdf file generated by R Markdown file **LakePowellElevationTempUncertainty.Rmd**

2) All **.png** files - figures generated by script files #2 or #3.

## Directions to Run
1. Dowwnload and install R and RStudio.
2. In your file explorer, open the subfolder (LakePowellTemperatureScenarios). Open the file **LakePowellTemperatureScenarios.Rproject**. R studio will open.
3. Select the file tab **LakePowellElevationTempUncertainty.Rmd**.
4. Click the **Knit** button (row below the file tabs)
5. R studio will run the blocks of code and markdown and generate the **LakePowellElevationTempUncertainty.pdf** file.
6. Alternatively in step 3, select the file tab **LakePowellElevationTempModelIntegration.r**
7. Select all the code in the file (ctrl-A) and click **Run** (row below the file tabs).
8. R studio will run the code, generate the figures, and store the figures as .png files in the same directory. 

## Recommended Citation
Rosenberg, D. (2020). Colorado River Fitures - Code Projects: Lake Powell Water Surface Elevations for Release Temperature Scenarios. Utah State University. Logan, Utah. https://github.com/dzeke/ColoradoRiverFutures/tree/master/LakePowellTemperatureScenarios.
